Emacs for Mac OS 8/9 and Mac OS X

Copyright (C) 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

   Permission is granted to anyone to make or distribute verbatim
   copies of this document as received, in any medium, provided that
   the copyright notice and permission notice are preserved, and that
   the distributor grants the recipient permission for further
   redistribution as permitted by this notice.

   Permission is granted to distribute modified versions of this
   document, or of portions of it, under the above conditions,
   provided also that they carry prominent notices stating who last
   changed them.

This directory contains the files needed to build Emacs on the Mac OS
8/9 and Mac OS X.  Many of the major features of the Unix version are
supported: multiple frames, colors, scroll bars, menu bars, use of the
mouse, fontsets, international characters, input methods, and coding
systems.

Mac OS specific support includes document drag-and-drop in the Finder,
transfer of text to and from other applications via the clipboard, and
sending AppleScript commands to other applications from Emacs.

The following are not supported on Mac OS 8/9 : unexec (dump-emacs),
asynchronous subprocesses (start-process), and networking
(open-network-stream).  These features work fine on Mac OS X.

There is basic support for synchronous subprocesses (call-process) on
Mac OS 8/9 although Unix commands that are used will need to be
ported.

Metrowerks CodeWarrior Pro 6 or MPW-GM (August 2001) can be used to
build Emacs on the Mac OS 8/9.  On Mac OS X, Emacs can be built using
the Developer Tools.  See the INSTALL file in this directory for
instructions on building Emacs.

Read the Mac OS section of the on-line help to find out about how to
use Emacs on the Mac.

A number of things do not work yet:

+ Emacs does not respond correctly to C-g under certain circumstances.  
  Sending the Emacs process a SIGINT externally will cause it 
  to interrupt.  This is due to the architecture of OSX's 
  Window Manager.

+ Support for certain image types (such as XPM) is not as extensive as 
  on other plaforms. 

+ Incorporate Apple's wrappers to be able to create a universal 
  binary that unexecs on first run for the given architecture.

If your Mac is connected to the Internet, report bugs by typing `M-x
report-emacs-bug' or by choosing the entry `Send Bug Report...'  in
the `Help' menu.  This will send the bug report to the address
emacs-pretest-bug@gnu.org.

Steven
<steven.tamm@mac.com>
