	     Emacs for Windows NT/2000 and Windows 95/98/ME

  This directory contains support for compiling and running GNU Emacs on
  Windows NT, Windows 95, and their successors.  This port supports all
  of the major functionality of the Unix version, including
  subprocesses, windowing features (fonts, colors, scroll bars, multiple
  frames, etc.), and networking support.

  Precompiled distributions are also available; ftp to

	ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/windows/emacs/latest/

  for the latest precompiled distributions.

* Building and installing

  See the INSTALL file in this directory for detailed instructions on
  building and installing Emacs on your system.

* Further information

  There is a web page that serves as a FAQ at:

	http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/windows/ntemacs.html

  There is also a mailing list for discussing issues related to this
  port of Emacs.  For information about the list, send a message to
  ntemacs-users-request@cs.washington.edu with the word "info" in the
  *body* of the message.  To subscribe to the list, send a message to
  the same address with the word "subscribe" in the body of the message;
  similarly, to unsubscribe from the list, send a message with the word
  "unsubscribe" in the message body.

  Another valuable source of information and help which should not be
  overlooked is the various Usenet news groups dedicated to Emacs.
  These are particuarly good for help with general issues which aren't
  specific to the Windows port of Emacs.  The main news groups to use
  for seeking help are:

	gnu.emacs.help
	comp.emacs

  There are also fairly regular postings and announcements of new or
  updated Emacs packages on this group:

	gnu.emacs.sources

  You are also always welcome to send me mail directly.  If you don't
  hear from me immediately, however, don't worry; it sometimes takes me
  a few days (or longer) to get to all of my mail regarding Emacs.

* Reporting bugs

  If you encounter a bug in this port of Emacs, we would like to hear
  about it.  First check the file etc/PROBLEMS and the FAQ on the web
  page above to see if the bug is already known and if there are any
  workarounds.  If not, then check whether the bug has something to do
  with code in your .emacs file, e.g. by invoking Emacs with the "-q
  --no-site-file" options.

  If you decide that it is a bug in Emacs that might be specific to the
  Windows port, send a message to the ntemacs-users@cs.washington.edu
  mailing list describing the bug, the version of Emacs that you are
  using, and the operating system that you are running on (Windows NT,
  95 or 98 including service pack level if known).  If the bug is
  related to subprocesses, also specify which shell you are using (e.g.,
  include the values of `shell-file-name' and `shell-explicit-file-name'
  in your message).

  If you think the bug is not specific to the Windows port of Emacs,
  then it is better to mail the bug report to bug-gnu-emacs@gnu.org so
  that it will be seen by the right people.  If Emacs has been set up to
  send mail, you can use the command M-x report-emacs-bug to create and
  send the bug report, but in some cases there is a function to report
  bugs in a specific package; e.g. M-x gnus-bug for Gnus, M-x
  c-submit-bug-report for C/C++/Java mode, etc.
